First Set
1. Data Frame
A 2D labeled data structure in Python (like an Excel table) used to store and manipulate tabular data.

2. Limitation of Label Encoding
Label encoding assigns numeric values to categories, which may imply an ordinal relationship even if none exists. 
This can mislead machine learning models when the data is purely nominal.

3. Need for Data Normalization
Normalization brings all features to the same scale (e.g., 0 to 1). 
This is important for algorithms like KNN or SVM and helps in faster convergence and accurate comparisons.

4. Techniques for Handling Missing Data

Remove rows or columns with missing values.

Replace with mean, median, or mode.

Use prediction models to estimate missing values.

Fill with a constant value like zero or "Unknown".


Second Set
1. Methods to Detect Outliers

Z-Score Method: Outliers have z-scores > ±3.

IQR Method: Outliers lie outside Q1−1.5×IQR or Q3+1.5×IQR.

Boxplot: Visual tool to spot extreme values.

2. Data Transformation Methods

Log Transformation

Square Root Transformation

Normalization / Standardization

Encoding categorical values (One-Hot / Label)

3. Display Null Value Statistics
Count how many null or missing values are present in each column of the dataset.

4. Replace Outliers with Mean
Identify outliers using IQR or Z-score and replace them with the mean value of that column.



Third Set
1. Mean, Mode, Median

Mean: Average of all values.

Mode: Most frequently occurring value.

Median: Middle value when data is sorted.

2. Standard Deviation
Shows how spread out the data is from the mean. A higher standard deviation indicates more variance.

3. Basic Statistical Summary
Includes count, mean, standard deviation, min, max, and percentiles for each numeric column.

4. Use of describe() Command
Summarizes key statistics of numerical columns in a DataFrame. Helps in quick EDA.



Text Preprocessing
1. Stemming and Lemmatization

Stemming: Cuts suffixes to form root words (e.g., “studies” → “studi”). May not always produce real words.

Lemmatization: Converts words to their base dictionary form (e.g., “studying” → “study”). More accurate.

Key Difference: Lemmatization is more precise and meaningful; stemming is faster but rougher.



Final Set
1. Types of Plots to Find Patterns
Line plot, Bar plot, Histogram, Box plot, Violin plot, Scatter plot, Swarm plot.

2. When to Use Distribution vs Categorical Plots

Distribution Plots: Used to see how values are distributed (e.g., histograms, KDE plots).

Categorical Plots: Used to compare categories (e.g., boxplots, swarm plots, violin plots).

3. Conclusion from Swarm Plot (Titanic Dataset)
Younger passengers may have had a higher survival rate. Swarm plots help visualize age vs survival grouped by gender or class.

4. Violinplot and hue Parameter

Hue allows comparison of a second categorical variable.

Example: sns.violinplot(x='sex', y='age', hue='survived', data=titanic)



Additional Data Science Viva Topics


1. What is Data Science?
A field that uses scientific methods, algorithms, and systems to extract knowledge and insights from structured and unstructured data.

2. What is Feature Engineering?
Creating or modifying features to improve the performance of machine learning models.

3. What is Overfitting and Underfitting?

Overfitting: Model performs well on training data but poorly on new data.

Underfitting: Model performs poorly on both training and testing data.

4. Supervised vs Unsupervised Learning

Supervised Learning: Uses labeled data for training (e.g., classification).

Unsupervised Learning: Finds hidden patterns in unlabeled data (e.g., clustering).

5. What is Cross-Validation?
A method to evaluate model performance by splitting data into training and validation sets multiple times.

6. What is Dimensionality Reduction?
Reducing the number of input features using techniques like PCA, while preserving important information.

7. What is a Confusion Matrix?
A table showing true positives, true negatives, false positives, and false negatives to evaluate classification models.

8. What is EDA (Exploratory Data Analysis)?
The process of analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics using visual methods before modeling.